WIP: Proposal: Support Timestamped Profiling Events (#594)
open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto: opentelemetry/proto/profiles/v1development/eventprofile.md

# Proposal: Support Timestamped Profiling Events

**Author(s):** @felixge in collaboration with @thegreystone, @jbachorik et al.

**🚧 WORK IN PROGRESS 🚧:** This proposal is still in the early stages. I'm mostly looking for feedback from active participants in the profiling SIG before soliciting feedback from the wider community.

## Summary

The OpenTelemetry profiling format is currently designed to record aggregated summaries of events. This proposal suggests to pivot the format toward recording individual events with timestamps while retaining the ability to record aggregated profiling data as well.

This will enable the following use cases.

> 1. Richer analysis of On-CPU as well as Off-CPU data.

Author: > Richer analysis of aggregated data, like On-CPU profiling

Not sure I follow. The use case enabled by this proposal is event based CPU profiling rather than aggregation. We already have aggregation?

> 1. Richer analysis of On-CPU as well as Off-CPU data.

Reviewer: OTel ebpf profiler could aggregate on CPU profiling data. This is possible by setting [Sample.value](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/793e43e25f2eb8063c2693bc2e66e16672cf7ed8/opentelemetry/proto/profiles/v1development/profiles.proto#L379-L385) to a different value than 1 and provide a timestamp in [Sample.timestamps_unix_nano](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/blob/main/opentelemetry/proto/profiles/v1development/profiles.proto#L394C19-L394C39) for each `Sample.value`. 
Currently, this aggregation is not done as it was rejected during the review process and so it is still a low hanging fruit for optimization.

2. Powerful visualizations such as as Thread Timelines, Flame Charts, and FlameScopes.
3. Better compatibility with JFR, Go Execution Traces and Linux perf.

## Motivation

Most of the current OpenTelemetry profiling format, including the concept of aggregating stack traces, is inherited from pprof.
However, given that we have [decided](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/issues/567#issuecomment-2286565449) that strict pprof compatibility is not a goal for the OpenTelemetry, we are now free to design a more flexible and extensible format that can be used for a wider range of profiling use cases than pprof.

> One use case that recently came up is the [collection of Off-CPU profiling data for the ebpf profiler](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler/pull/144). The attendees of the [Sep 5](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19UqPPPlGE83N37MhS93uRlxsP1_wGxQ33Qv6CDHaEp0/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.lenvx4xd62c6) SIG meeting agreed that aggregated profiling data is not ideal for this use case, as it increases the difficulty to reason about the collected data and to correlate it with application behavior. This is especially true when it comes to the analysis of tail latency problems caused by outliers. So instead aggregation, it is much more useful to record this data as individual events with timestamps as well as additional context such as thread id, trace id and span id. This becomes even more powerful when On-CPU samples are also recorded with timestamps, as it allows users to identify spikes and stalls of CPU activity as well as Off-CPU examplars that explain the cause of the stalls and resulting latency (or lack of throughput).

Author: Ack. I'm not trying to suggest that aggregated Off-CPU profiles are useless. But they tend to be dominated by idle threads, so it can be tricky to navigate them. Additionally they can't really be used to analyze tail latencies since all they show are averages.

> One use case that recently came up is the [collection of Off-CPU profiling data for the ebpf profiler](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-ebpf-profiler/pull/144). The attendees of the [Sep 5](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19UqPPPlGE83N37MhS93uRlxsP1_wGxQ33Qv6CDHaEp0/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.lenvx4xd62c6) SIG meeting agreed that aggregated profiling data is not ideal for this use case, as it increases the difficulty to reason about the collected data and to correlate it with application behavior. This is especially true when it comes to the analysis of tail latency problems caused by outliers. So instead aggregation, it is much more useful to record this data as individual events with timestamps as well as additional context such as thread id, trace id and span id. This becomes even more powerful when On-CPU samples are also recorded with timestamps, as it allows users to identify spikes and stalls of CPU activity as well as Off-CPU examplars that explain the cause of the stalls and resulting latency (or lack of throughput).

Reviewer 2: FWIW, we use a mix of both. Overlaying active CPU over aggregate wait CPU shows where the CPU is trying to execute and getting delayed. From there we allow zooming into individual time sections involved in the aggregate to debug thread interactions, etc. We need both within the same profile to achieve the same thing we have in our private formats.

In addition to the manual analysis of such data, collecting timestamps also enables powerful visualizations such as [Thread Timelines](https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/continuous-profiler-timeline-view/), [Flame Charts](https://developer.chrome.com/docs/devtools/performance/reference#flame-chart), and [FlameScopes](https://www.brendangregg.com/blog/2018-11-08/flamescope-pattern-recognition.html). See [this document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1285Rp1pSu6eOTInzPynCiJvDoG-r2cjqxWwTewaTncs/edit?tab=t.0#heading=h.jze26hdz58dy) or [this presentation](https://youtu.be/53UIPZfz-_U?si=x4uYpMtOCIJy8ihY) for more details.

Last but not least, first-class support for timestamps allows greater compatibility with other profiling tools such as JFR, Go Execution Traces and Linux perf that also record timestamps for profiling events.

## Design

> This proposal comes with a prelimary sketch for the new format to illustrate the feasibility of supporting timestamped as well as aggregated profiling data within the same format. However, the final design will be subject to further discussion and refinement and the changes can be merged via smaller PRs if needed.

Reviewer: Should the focus be on timestamps for non aggregated profiling data?
Just a thought: With data-type profiling ,e.g. https://github.com/golang/go/issues/69699, it might not be possible to attach to every profiling information a timestamp. So maybe a generic approach might be best?
```suggestion
This proposal comes with a prelimary sketch for the new format to illustrate the feasibility of supporting event based as well as aggregated profiling data within the same format. However, the final design will be subject to further discussion and refinement and the changes can be merged via smaller PRs if needed.
```

```

### Timestamped CPU Profile

```txtpb
event_types: [
    { # index 0
        name_string_index: 1  # cpu_sample
        unit_string_index: 2  # ms
        default_value:     10 # each event represents 10ms of CPU time
        clock_id:          0
    }
]
clocks: [
    { # index 0
        frequency :      1_000_000_000          # 1 Ghz clock, i.e. 1 cycle = 1 ns
        time_unix_nanos: 1_257_894_000_000_000_000
    }
]
attributes: [
    { # index 0
        key_index: 4          # thread.id
        value: {int_value: 1} # 1
    },
    { # index 1
        key_index: 4,         # thread.id
        value: {int_value: 2} # 2
    }
]
strings: [
    "",             # index 0
    "cpu_time",     # index 1
    "milliseconds", # index 2
    "unix_epoch",   # index 3
    "thread.id"     # index 4
]

events: [
    {
        event_type_index: 0     # cpu_sample (can be omitted on the wire)
        stack_index: 1          # main;serve_request
        time:        10_500_000 # 10.5ms since clock start
        attributes:  [0]        # thread_id: 1
    }
    {
        event_type_index: 0  # cpu_sample (can be omitted on the wire)
        stack_index: 2       # main;foo

>         time:        300_000 # 0.3ms since previous event

Reviewer 2: Why is time based on previous event? This implies we have events in perfect time order. Often during collection, especially off-CPU (cswitch) events, the start of the event is not in-order of when it completes. This would cause collectors to sort potentially large sets of data (cswitches can be massive).

Can we just have an absolute time option vs the delta time encoding scheme?

Reviewer 3: I imagine delta encoding is used to reduce payload size

Author: The purpose of delta encoding is to reduce payload sizes. `time` is an `int64` right now, so negative values are possible. If we frequently need to deal with unordered events, we could define `time` as an `sint64` which allows to encode negative numbers more efficiently. However, it comes a the expense of encoding positive numbers.

Anyway, I don't feel very strongly about delta encoding. I'm planning to do some benchmarks later to provide some evidence (or lack of evidence) that it's going to be beneficial.

Reviewer 2: 64-bits are already variable encoded, and if they were deltas off of a stable epoch (like profile start time). They would be quite small without deltas between each other. I get why we would want delta encoding, but it comes at a sorting cost that is likely really bad for off-cpu data sources (since they complete at random times compared to the start time).

]

events: [
    {
        event_type_index: 0     # cpu_sample (can be omitted on the wire)
        stack_index: 1          # main;serve_request
        time:        10_500_000 # 10.5ms since clock start
        attributes:  [0]        # thread_id: 1
    }
    {
        event_type_index: 0     # cpu_sample (can be omitted on the wire)
        stack_index: 2          # main;foo
        time:        300_000    # 0.3ms since previous event
        attributes: [1]         # thread_id: 2
    },
    {
        event_type_index: 0     # cpu_sample (can be omitted on the wire)
        stack_index: 1          # main;serve_request
        time:        9_200_000  # 9.2ms since previous event
        attributes:  [0]        # thread_id: 1
    },
    {
        event_type_index: 1            # thread_state
        stack_index:      1            # main;serve_request;mutex_lock
        time:             300_000_000  # 300ms since previous event
        duration:         50_000_500   # 50ms
        attributes:       [0, 2]       # thread_id: 1, thread.state: mutex
    },
    {
        event_type_index: 1             # thread_state
        stack_index:      1             # main;foo;sleep

>         time:             5_000_000     # 5ms since previous event

Reviewer 2: IMHO, if we had a duration in addition to time, we could make off_cpu and stall events clearer. IE: Stall started at time X, lasted for Y. This gives a start/stop. This could be stored in an attribute, but feels somewhat wasteful to have to have an attribute per-duration value.

>         time:             5_000_000     # 5ms since previous event

Author: duration and value are separate fields in the current proposal, so I think the use cases brought up here should be covered? https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-proto/pull/594/files/7d85bba21098f7950813d9717f06e86865da0726#diff-4a0777f946b5d445b17b64906a2ee5b121a070ee499189a656988ad0df350e11R81-R94

>         time:             5_000_000     # 5ms since previous event

Reviewer 2: Yeah, sorry I missed that! Definitely covers what I was asking for, thanks!

        duration:         1_000_000_500 # 1s
        attributes:       [1, 3]        # thread_id: 2, thread.state: sleep
    },
]
# stack, location, function, mapping, etc. omitted for brevity
```
### Aggregated Memory Profile

Below is an example of an aggregated memory profile like those available in Go.

```txtpb
event_types: [
    { # index 0
        name_string_index: 1 # allocations
        unit_string_index: 3 # By (bytes)
    }
    { # index 1
        name_string_index: 2 # liveheap
        unit_string_index: 3 # By (bytes)
    }
]
strings: [
    "",              # index 0
    "allocations",   # index 1

>     "liveheap",      # index 2

Reviewer 4: I think it's necessary to differentiate between virtual memory, physical memory, and situations like page faults. Typically, virtual memory consumed is more than physical memory because some memory regions might be zeroed and never referenced.  Some might be 'copy-on-write'.

Author: This needs to be clarified, probably via semantic conventions. But the example given here is allocations profiled by the Go runtime. Those are always measured in terms of virtual memory. I wrote up more details on this [here](https://www.datadoghq.com/blog/go-memory-metrics/).
